1450 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025
Optimizing UA V-Based Data Collection in IoT
Networks With Dynamic Service Time and
Buffer-Aware Trajectory Planning
Madhu Donipati , Ankur Jaiswal , Student Member, IEEE, Abhishek Hazra , Member, IEEE,
Nabajyoti Mazumdar , Senior Member, IEEE, and Jagpreet Singh, Member, IEEE
Abstract—Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UA Vs) have become vital
tools for data collection in Internet of Things (IoT) networks,
enabling efﬁcient monitoring and information acquisition across
various domains. However, UA V-assisted IoT networks often face
signiﬁcant challenges such as high data loss, latency, and resource
inefﬁciency due to inadequate buffer management and dynamic
service time (DST) allocation for IoT nodes. Existing approaches
frequently overlook critical factors such as IoT nodes’ energy
levels, UA Vs’ energy constraints, and the dynamic data generation
rates of IoT devices. To address these challenges, this article
introduces a novel strategy for dynamically optimizing UA V
trajectories by integrating real-time data from ground nodes and
UA V energy levels. Given the DST and buffer constraints (BC)
of IoT devices, optimizing UA V trajectories for data collection
is a complex problem. We propose an optimization framework
that strategically plans UA V trajectories to minimize service
time at designated Rendezvous Points (RPs) and bypasses RPs
when necessary to reduce the overall trajectory path, taking
into account buffer status and dynamic service time adjustments.
To efﬁciently solve this optimization problem, we employ a
meta-heuristic technique known as Path Cheapest Arc with
Guided Local Search (PCA-GLS) for UA V route planning within
predeﬁned time windows. Extensive simulations demonstrate
the effectiveness of our proposed solution in optimizing UA V
trajectories and improving data collection performance compared
to existing algorithms such as BA-UA V , ACO-MS, and NSGA-II.
Index Terms —IoT, buffer-awareness, unmanned aerial vehi-
cles, data gathering, time-windows.
I. I NTRODUCTION
O
VER the past decade, the Internet of Things (IoT)
has seen a growth in its adoption for various applica-
tions, such as environmental monitoring, precision agriculture,
Received 22 December 2023; revised 8 June 2024; accepted 12 November
2024. Date of publication 18 November 2024; date of current version
22 April 2025. This work was supported in part by the SERB-DST, India,
under Empowerment and Equity Opportunities for Excellence in Science,
Sanction Order No.: EEQ/2022/000400. The associate editor coordinating
the review of this article and approving it for publication was J. J. Yang.
(Corresponding author: Abhishek Hazra.)
Madhu Donipati, Ankur Jaiswal, and Nabajyoti Mazumdar are
with the Department of Information Technology, Indian Institute
of Information Technology Allahabad, Allahabad 211012, India
(e-mail: donipatimadhu39@gmail.com; rsi2017504@iiita.ac.in;
nabajyoti@iiita.ac.in).
Abhishek Hazra is with the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Indian Institute of Information Technology Sri City, Sri City
517646, India (e-mail: abhishek.hazra1@gmail.com).
Jagpreet Singh is with the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, Rupnagar 140001, India
(e-mail: jagpreets@iitrpr.ac.in).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3500778
disaster management, health care, military surveillance, and
other industrial automation [1], [2]. These applications and
corresponding IoT Devices (IoTDs), such as smart cameras,
smart watches, etc., disseminated across vast areas, gather
valuable data often critical for decision-making processes.
Speciﬁcally, data collection is a crucial operation in the IoT,
impacting the performance, functionality, and utility of such
systems [3], [4]. However, efﬁcient data collection from IoT
nodes presents signiﬁcant challenges due to individual nodes’
limited power, computational capacity, and communication
range [5]. Yet, the traditional multi-hop data transmission
through these links, especially in geographically scattered IoT,
can lead to high energy consumption and network latency.
An emerging solution to this challenge is to deploy UA Vs
as mobile data collectors or gateways in these networks [6].
UA V-assisted IoT systems leverage UA Vs equipped with smart
sensors, wireless transceivers, and antennas to enhance data
collection [7], [8]. The mobility of UA Vs enables direct data
collection from IoT nodes, effectively overcoming the short
communication range problem and reducing the energy con-
sumption associated with multi-hop transmissions [9].U A V s
offer rapid deployment, mobility, and data relay capabili-
ties, optimizing trajectory and energy consumption as data
collectors [10]. This approach is particularly beneﬁcial in
scenarios with ground sensor obstructions, enabling Line-of-
Sight communications during data collection. By employing
UA Vs as data collectors, closer proximity to ground sensors
is achieved, facilitating efﬁcient data retrieval and conserving
transmission energy, thereby enhancing energy savings and
system efﬁciency [11], [12].
A. Challenges and Motivations
In UA V-assisted IoT networks, optimizing UA V trajectories
is essential to minimize data loss and ensure efﬁcient data
collection. However, it presents unique challenges, such as
optimizing the UA V’s ﬂight path while considering UA Vs’
energy limit, buffer constraints of IoT nodes, and adher-
ing to time windows for serving IoT nodes [13]. Existing
approaches often overlook such factors which leads to subopti-
mal UA V trajectories and inefﬁcient data collection processes.
To address these challenges, some researchers focus on opti-
mizing the UA V’s ﬂight path for improved coverage [6],
while other researchers consider time-window constraints in
trajectory planning. Certain research works also account for
the buffer status of sensors in the UA V’s data collection
1932-4537 c⃝ 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on January 30,2026 at 17:23:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
DONIPATI et al.: OPTIMIZING UA V-BASED DATA COLLECTION IN IoT NETWORKS WITH DST-BA 1451
Fig. 1. UA V assisted data collection with RP.
strategy [14]. However, comprehensive strategies that simulta-
neously address UA V’s ﬂight path optimization, time-window
constraints, and buffer-aware data collection are still lacking.
Another crucial aspect is the selection of RP from IoT nodes,
which the UA V visits to collect data, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Our research aims to address these challenges by resolving the
buffer-aware data collection problem. It speciﬁcally focuses on
confronting a pivotal issue in UA V coverage, which involves
determining the optimal path for a single UA V to serve
multiple RPs within speciﬁed time windows.
B. Contributions
The Path Cheapest Arc with Guided Local Search (PCA-
GLS) algorithm is leveraged to plan the UA V’s trajectory with
time windows, enabling IoT nodes to be visited within their
respective time windows. Additionally, a buffer-aware strategy
is introduced, where the service time of the UA V is adjusted
at each RP based on the buffer status of the IoT node. The
major contributions to the proposed work are listed as follows:
• Optimal RP Set Selection: The RP selection strategy
nominates a minimal set of RPs to cover all the IoT nodes
present in the network. The key goal is to optimize the
covered path and service time at designated RPs.
• Adaptation of the PCA-GLS: The meta-heuristic method
Path Cheapest Arc with Guided Local Search (PCA-GLS)
has been employed to efﬁciently plan the UA V’s path
considering the time-constrained service at each RP. It
will eventually reduce data loss and improve UA V data
collection rates.
• Dynamic Service Time Adjustment: The proposed
scheme dynamically adjusts the service times of the UA V ,
further enhancing the efﬁciency and adaptability of data
collection in dispersed IoT networks.
The remaining sections are organized as follows. Section II
highlights the state-of-the-art techniques for buffer-aware
UA V data collection strategies. Section III deﬁnes several
parameters and formulates our objective function. Section IV
brieﬂy discusses the PCA-GLS method and dynamic ser-
vice optimization mechanism. The performance analysis of
our proposed strategy is illustrated in Section V. Finally,
Section VI concludes the paper with a brief discussion on
future work.
II. R
ELATED WORK
Over time, various research efforts on UA V-assisted data
gathering in IoT have been conducted, with most studies
primarily addressing UA V path-ﬁnding challenges, data col-
lection issues, or buffer management problems [15].T os t a y
within the scope of this paper, two speciﬁc categories related
to IoT data collection are focused on: (i) UA V-based data
collection (ii) Buffer aware data collection.
A. UAV-Based Data Collection
In recent years, many studies have utilized UA Vs as mobile
data collectors for sensor nodes (SNs), extending network
lifetime [16]. Optimization of the wake-up schedule for SNs
and the UA V’s trajectory aims to minimize the maximum
energy consumption of all SNs while ensuring reliable data
collection [17]. Despite being cost-effective and ﬂexible, UA Vs
face challenges with their limited load capacity, particularly
for long-term or distant tasks. To overcome this limitation,
assembly UA Vs are proposed, focusing on optimizing energy
resources through system modeling, energy cyclic cooperation,
and an in-air energy replenishing strategy [18]. UA V trajectory
planning in [6] emphasizes minimizing mission time by
optimizing UA V speed, position, and visiting sequence, con-
sidering factors like Age of Information (AoI) and on-board
energy. Methods such as successive convex approximation
(SCA) and genetic algorithms (GA) are used for speed
and path optimization, supplemented by an AoI-and-energy-
aware trajectory optimization algorithm [13]. Exploration of
energy minimization in UA V-assisted sensor networks in [13]
involves optimizing trajectory and sensor power while con-
sidering constraints using SCA and block coordinate descent
(BCD). This includes determining sensor serving orders and
UA V hovering positions, with the latter affecting sensor
power. Optimal sensor serving orders are determined using
the efﬁcient Cutting-Plane method for the standard traveling
salesman problem (TSP), while UA V position and sensor
power optimization employ the pattern search method for
transmit power and SCA for UA V hovering positions. In [19],
a very interesting solution for UA V energy constraints was
introduced, suggesting a UA V data collector supported by a
mobile charging station (UGV) to minimize IoT device AoI
using multi-agent deep Q-network (MADQN) to optimizes
UA V charging, IoT servicing, and UGV trajectory, considering
obstacles and IoT movements. Strategically placing refueling
vehicles on the ground provides a promising means to extend
UA V operational range, enabling quick recharging without
r e t u r n i n gt oaﬁ x e db a s e .
B. Buffer Aware Data Collection
Buffer management in UA V-assisted IoT networks is crucial
for handling transmission variability, preventing data loss, and
optimizing data transmission efﬁciency. It involves temporarily
storing data packets during poor transmission conditions to
ensure reliable data collection and minimize delays and packet
loss. The study in[20] introduces a UA V path planning algorithm
for reliable data collection, adjusting trajectories based on the
buffer sizes of nodes connected to Access Points (AP) while
conserving energy of the nodes, selecting optimal APs, and
preventing data loss. It proposes a modiﬁed ACO for trajectory
design and machine learning for data loss prevention. In the
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on January 30,2026 at 17:23:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1452 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025
context of UA V-assisted edge caching in IoTs, it is emphasized
that the simultaneous design of UA V trajectories and caching
strategies is essential for improving quality of experience
and minimizing content update expenses. A collaborative
approach is suggested for this in [21], considering both user
experience and content update costs which enables UA Vs to
efﬁciently serve areas with high demand for popular content. A
queue-aware cooperatively caching mechanism in a multi-UA V-
assisted system, addressing random user requests through a
well-designed connected dominating set (CDS) for collaborative
caching scheduling is introduced in [22]. The proposed work
in [23] introduces a trajectory planning algorithm for an energy-
efﬁcient Mobile Sink (MS) tour. It considers limited buffer
size of the nodes and uniform sensing rates, utilizing virtual
grid cell construction to adjust communication ranges based on
data buffering. The aim is to minimize the MS traveling path
length and solve the nominal MS sojourn scheduling problem
within a speciﬁed computation time. In [24], sensor nodes
(SNs) are managed by cluster heads (CHs) for data collection
with UA V support, focusing on minimizing deployment
costs and energy usage while meeting communication, UA V
mission time, and battery constraints through ofﬂine and
online UA V-based data collection methods. The study in [14]
investigates a mobile relaying system assisted by a UA V with
a ﬁnite buffer, optimizing the UA V relay node’s trajectory
to maximize data throughput while accommodating delay-
limited and delay-tolerant transmission requirements using SCA
and Quadratically constrained programming (QCP). In [9],
UA Vs with virtual queues address transmission challenges in
UA V-assisted IoT networks. A Deep Reinforcement Learning
(DRL) model minimizes the Expected Weighted Sum Age of
Information for IoT devices by adjusting UA V altitude based
on real-time channel conditions.
Existing research primarily addresses individual aspects of
data collection, path selection, delay optimization, buffer man-
agement and dynamic service time adjustment. Although some
studies acknowledge the signiﬁcance of buffer-aware UA V
data gathering in IoT, there is a need for further investigation
into challenges such as buffer management with dynamic
service time within UA V-based data collection in IoT. These
gaps are the focus of our proposed work that integrates an efﬁ-
cient UA V path planning strategy, a buffer-aware scheduling
mechanism, and time window considerations. Table I presents
a summary of the existing literature regarding UA V-assisted
networks, delineating the aims of previous research alongside
our proposed approach.
III. S
YSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
In the proposed scenario, we consider an environment where
a total of N stationary IoT nodes are strategically dispersed
across the designated area for monitoring. This conﬁguration
includes the deployment of one UA V and a centralized depot.
This optimized setup ensures comprehensive coverage of
the monitoring zone, guaranteeing robust and reliable data
collection. In the proposed work, we have considered a hybrid
mode for UA V data collection, which includes ﬂying mode
and hovering mode [3].
TABLE I
SUMMARY OF THE RELATED WORK AND PROPOSED WORK
TABLE II
DEFINITIONS OF COMMON NOTATIONS
A. Symbols and Deﬁnitions
The subset of IoT nodes that are selected as RPs as a graph
is denoted as G = (V, E), where V = {v1, v2,..., vn} is
the set of vertices (RPs), and E = {e1, e2,..., em} is the
set of edges representing the travel time between RPs. Each
vertex vi has a corresponding time window[ei, li] (earliest and
latest arrival times), a buffer capacity Bi , and a buffer status
bi . The UA V starts and ends its route at a designated depot
node, denoted as v0. The aim is to ﬁnd a route sequence R =
{v0, v1,..., vn, v0} that minimizes the total travel distance,
respects the time window constraints, and optimizes service
time based on buffer status. Table II illustrates a short list of
related notations and their meanings.
B. Energy Consumption Model
In the IoT network, overall energy efﬁciency is a critical
performance metric due to the limited energy resources of
the nodes and potentially the data-collecting entities like
UA Vs. In the proposed system, the IoT nodes and the UA V
incur signiﬁcant energy costs, which impact the system’s
operational performance and lifespan. Therefore, it is essential
to accurately model the energy consumption of these key
components and devise strategies to optimize them. For the
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on January 30,2026 at 17:23:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
DONIPATI et al.: OPTIMIZING UA V-BASED DATA COLLECTION IN IoT NETWORKS WITH DST-BA 1453
IoT nodes, we adopt the ﬁrst-order radio model, a widely used
energy consumption model in IoT proposed in [20].
The energy usage of UA V is affected by traveling to
Rendezvous Points (RPs) and transferring data to IoTDs.
The primary energy depletion in UA Vs results from ﬂight
mechanics and data transmission. In our model, we adopt a
mechanical energy consumption model based on propulsion
as in [25] which considers the energy consumption dependent
on acceleration for rotary-wing UA V . The mechanical energy
consumed by the UA V over N time slots is represented as
E
ME .
EME =Δ
N∑
i=1
wc∥a[i]−ag∥2 (1)
where a represents the acceleration vector and ag denotes
the vector due to gravity acceleration and Δ is the length of
the time slot. w denotes the energy consumption coefﬁcient
attributed to resistance induced by factors like wind, rain
or other weather conditions. w = 1 signiﬁes ideal weather
conditions; otherwise, w > 1. c is the energy consumption
coefﬁcient associated with UA V properties such as mass,
moment of inertia, etc. Thus the total energy consumed by the
UAV in N time slot is given by following equation.
UA V
E =Δ
N∑
i=1
wc∥a[i]−ag∥2 + Ptx NΔ (2)
where Ptx represents the energy consumption due to the data
transmission.
C. Communication Model
In the context of UA V-based data collection from selected
RPs, we need to establish a communication model between
the UA V and the IoT Nodes present in the network [26].T h e
signal transmission channel is inﬂuenced by factors such as
line-of-sight (LoS) and non-line-of-sight (NLoS) links, and the
path loss is deduced as follows.
Lγ
(
du,n(t)
)
=
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
( 4πfdu,n (t)
c
)2
δ0,γ=0
( 4πfdu,n (t)
c
)2
δ1,γ=1
(3)
Here, f represents the carrier frequency, c denotes the speed
of light, and δ0 and δ1 represent the NLoS and LoS links’
excessive path losses. The coordinates can be used to deter-
mine the distance du, n(t) between the UA V hovering over
RP cn and the scheduled IoT node Iu :
du,n(t)=
√
(xu(t)−xn(t))2 +( yu(t)−yn(t))2 + h2 (4)
The data uploading process begins once the UA V reaches the
RP cn and establishes a communication connection with IoT
node Iu . Pt denotes the transmission power of IoT node Iu .
The data uploading rate for su is expressed as following.
Ru,n(t)= B log2
(
1+ αPt
Lγ
(
du,n(t)
)
σ2
)
(5)
Here, αrepresents the channel power gain at the reference
distance of 1 meter, and B and σ2 are the system bandwidth
and the noise power at the UA V receiver, respectively. To
further analyze the efﬁciency of data uploading time, we
introduce an equation as the ratio of the data buffered data
size to the data uploading rate, denoted as D
u,n(t).
Du,n(t)= Bi
Ru,n(t) (6)
Here, Bi represents the amount of buffered data that is
uploaded from IoT node Iu to the UA V . By considering this
ratio, we can evaluate the effectiveness of the data uploading
process in terms of the allocated transmission time.
D. Channel Model
In our model we have used Rician channel fading model
(RCF) which is crucial in UA V scenarios, capturing both LoS
and scattered signal components. While UA V communication
resembles terrestrial channels, factors like mobility and alti-
tude inﬂuence its characteristics. At higher altitudes, clear
LOS communication prevails, resulting in a higher Rician K-
factor. Nevertheless, multipath propagation persists, causing
fading effects. Altitude changes can intensify these effects.
As UA Vs maneuver, channel conditions ﬂuctuate rapidly,
demanding adaptable communication systems. The channel
fading experienced by IoT devices and UA Vs comprises both
large-scale and small-scale fading components deﬁned as
following equation [27].
F =
√
(PL × SF).h (7)
where PL refers to signal strength attenuation, considering
factors such as observation height, angle, propagation distance
and fuselage structure, while variable S
F accounts for shad-
owing caused by obstacles along the propagation path and h
represents the channel impulse response between the transmit-
ter and receiving antennas, expressed as the combination of
both LoS and NLoS components in the following equation as
in Rician channel fading model.
h =
√
K
K +1 · hL +
√
1
K +1 · hNL (8)
where, hL denotes the complex channel gain for the LoS
component, hNL represents that for the NLoS or scattered
components and K is the Rician K-factor which determines
the severity of fading, with higher values indicating stronger
line-of-sight dominance and lower values suggesting increased
scattering.
E. Problem Formulation
The key objective of this work is to optimize the travel
distance while minimizing service delay and buffer data for
UA Vs. The objective function is formulated as follows:
1) Input:
• A set of locations N = {0,1,..., n +1 }, where
location 0 and location n + 1 are the depot, and the
other locations represent the visiting nodes.
• A distance matrix Dmat =[ dij]n+1×n+1 represent-
ing the travel time or cost between locations i and
j. It is typically assumed that dij = dji for all i, j ∈
N , and dii =0 for all i ∈N .
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on January 30,2026 at 17:23:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1454 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025
• A set of time windows W = {[ei, li]}n
i=1, where
ei and li represent the earliest and latest time that
service can begin at location i respectively.
• A set of service times S = {si}n
i=1, where si is the
time required to serve node i.
2) Decision Variables:
• xij =1 if the UA V travels from locationi to location
j, and 0 otherwise.
3) Objective:
Minimize ∑
i,j∈N dij xij , which is the total travel time
or cost for UA V networks.
4) Constraints:
• Each node is visited exactly once: ∑
i∈N xij =1
for all j ∈N \{0, n +1}.
• The UA V starts and ends its route at the depot:∑
j∈N x0j = ∑
i∈N xi(n+1) =1 .
• Time window constraints are: ej ≤tj ≤lj −sj for
all j ∈N \{0, n +1}.
• The data uploading time Du,n(t) must be bounded
by maximum tolerable delay.
5) Buffer Management The service time (Si) at each node
i depends on the buffer status (bi) and is deﬁned as:
Si =
⎧
⎨
⎩
Tf , if bi = Bi
Tp, if bi < Bi
Tn, if bi < Bi
(9)
IV . PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
From the objective function, we can easily observe that
ﬁnding the shortest possible path among the RPs is complex
and mostly NP-hard. Due to their computational difﬁculty, no
effective algorithms can solve NP-hard problems in polyno-
mial time. Finding optimal solutions for large instances of
NP-hard problems is computationally impossible, but several
algorithmic techniques exist to get close to the optimal
solution. Therefore, we propose a UA V-Based Data collec-
tion scheme with Dynamic Service Time and Buffer-Aware
trajectory planning (DST-BA). In the proposed solution, we
have introduced heuristic algorithms: (A) Selecting RPs from
a given set of nodes, (B) Planning the UA V’s Path considering
Time Windows, and (C) Dynamic Service Time Adjustment
Algorithm. The key objective is to obtain a near-optimal
solution in complex UA V communication networks.
A. Selection of RPs
In the proposed approach to route planning, a key consid-
eration is the selection of RPs, as illustrated in Fig. 2. These
points are predeﬁned locations in the network of nodes that
serve as gathering or checkpoint locations for the UA V during
its mission. The key objective here is to select a minimal set of
RPs that covers all IoT nodes in the network. The Algorithm 1
represents the procedure for the proposed RP selection in this
work. The Euclidean distance d
ij between nodes i and j is
calculated as follows.
dij =
√(
xi −xj
)2 +
(
yi −yj
)2 (10)
where (xi, yi) and (xj, yj) represent the coordinates.
Algorithm 1 calculates the neighborhood for each node based
Fig. 2. Illustration of RP selection over the network.
Algorithm 1 Rendezvous Point Selection
Require: Nodes N , Location (x, y), Maximum radius Rmax
Ensure: A set of Rendezvous Points RP
1: Initialize an empty set RP.
2: for each node ni in N do
3: Calculate its set of neighbors Nni ,
4: end for
5: while N is not empty do
6: Select the node n∗in N with the largest Nn∗.
7: Add n∗to RP.
8: Remove n∗and all nodes in Nn∗ from N .
9: for each remaining node ni in N do
10: Update Nni to remove nodes that are not in N .
11: end for
12: end while
13: return RP
on the communication radius. It then iteratively selects the
node with the highest number of neighbors as an RP and
removes this node and its neighbors from consideration as
RPs. This process continues until all nodes are covered by the
selected set of RPs, forming the set of all RPs. The selection
of suitable RPs for the UA V is a crucial step in effective data
collection from the IoT nodes.
•Reduction of Redundant Data: By collecting data only
from IoT nodes within R
max , the UA V avoids redundant data
collection from distant nodes. This helps to reduce noisy data.
B. UAV Path Planning With Time-Windows
The UA V path planning problem with time windows
involves ﬁnding the optimal route for a single UA V to serve
a number of nodes within speciﬁed time windows while
minimizing the total travel cost. This can be achieved using a
method called Path Cheapest Arc with Guided Local Search.
•Route Construction with Path Cheapest Arc:
Starting from the current node i (initially the depot), the
algorithm identiﬁes the node j that is not yet included in the
route (R) and has the lowest travel cost (referred as “cheapest
arc”). It ensures that visiting this node does not violate the
time window constraints. The algorithm then adds node j to
the route and proceeds to the next iteration from the newly
added node. This process continues until all nodes have been
visited. This strategy forms the essence of the Path Cheapest
Arc algorithm.
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on January 30,2026 at 17:23:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
DONIPATI et al.: OPTIMIZING UA V-BASED DATA COLLECTION IN IoT NETWORKS WITH DST-BA 1455
Path Cheapest Arc
• Construct a route R.
• Start at the depot (node 0).
• While there are unvisited nodes that can be
serviced without violating the time window
constraints:
– Find the node j not in R that minimizes
D[i][j] (the cost of travel from the current
node i), subject to the constraints
arrival_time + D[i][j]+ sj ≤lj .
– Add node j to R, update the UA V’s arrival
time at the next node, and mark node j as
visited.
• When no more nodes can be added, return to
the depot.
• Solution Improvement with Guided Local Search: In the
GLS algorithm, penalties are added to certain features of the
solution in order to guide the search towards unexplored areas
of the solution space and help it escape from local minima. The
use of high penalties can discourage the selection of certain
routes or nodes in the solution. When dealing with the UA V
routing problem with time windows, one important aspect to
consider is the tardiness at each node, which refers to the
amount of arrival time exceeding the node’s deadline. If a
solution involves arriving late at a node, it can incur a penalty.
Initially, the algorithm may prioritize routes that result in some
late arrivals, as it allows for servicing more nodes and reducing
the total travel distance. However, when a high penalty is
applied to tardiness, the cost of such solutions increases. This
prompts the algorithm to reject these solutions during the
local search process and instead select alternatives that meet
all deadlines, even if they require longer travel distances.
This approach strikes a balance between minimizing travel
distance and meeting deadlines, leading to more practical and
reliable solutions for real-world applications. In our proposed
approach, we have incorporated a penalty for violating time
window constraints at each location.
Guided Local Search
• Given the initial solution R, apply the Guided
Local Search (GLS) metaheuristic.
• Perform a local search operation on R to ﬁnd a
neighboring solution R′ that improves the total
cost.
• If no improving neighbor is found, assign
penalties to certain features of the current
solution.
• Continue the local search with the penalized
objective function f +λp, where λis a penalty
factor. Repeat this process until a stopping
criterion is met, such as a maximum number of
iterations or a time limit.
The ﬁnal output of GLS is the best solution found
during the search, R
∗, which is a route for the UA V
that minimizes the total cost, including penalties.
Algorithm 2 PCA-GLS
Require: N: nodes, D: distance matrix
Ensure: R∗: optimal route
1: R ← empty route
2: i ← 0 {start at depot}
3: while there are unvisited nodes do
4: Path Cheapest Arc()
5: end while
6: Return to depot
7: Apply GUIDED_LOCAL_SEARCH to R, obtain R′
8: while improving neighbor exists in R′ do
9: Find improving neighbor, update R′
10: end while
11: Penalize features if no improving neighbor
12: Repeat search with penalized objective function until
stopping criterion met
13: R∗← best solution found during search
14: return R∗
It is important to note that this penalty does not directly
modify the ﬁtness function of the GLS algorithm. The detailed
steps of the UA V path planning while considering time
windows are presented in Algorithm 2.
C. Dynamic Service Time Adjustment
The proposed research builds upon and enhances this
concept by introducing dynamic service time adjustment.
Traditional approaches often assume a ﬁxed service time for
data gathering, irrespective of the data volume or buffer status
of the node. In contrast, the proposed strategy dynamically
adjusts the service time based on the buffer status and the
distance from the depot to the next point. By choosing to
navigate to the center of the node’s communication range when
the buffer is full and to the nearest point on the communication
range when the buffer is not full, the proposed strategy has
the potential to save more time and power.
The nearest point on the edge of a circle to a given point is
calculated using vector normalization. Given the center of the
circle (c
x, cy), the radius Rc, and the given point (px, py),t h e
vector from the center to the point is ⃗v =( px −cx, py −cy).
The distance d between the center and the point is then
calculated using the Pythagorean theorem.
d =
√
(px −cx)2 +
(
py −cy
)2. (11)
The normalized vector is then ˆv = 1
d⃗v =( px−cx
d , py−cy
d ).
The nearest point (nx, ny) on the edge of the circle to the
given point is then R times the normalized vector away from
the center.
nx = cx + Rc · px −cx
d , (12)
ny = cy + Rc · py −cy
d . (13)
This strategy aims to dynamically adjust the service times
at RPs based on their buffer status and relative positions, as
illustrated in Fig. 3. Algorithm 3 presents the internal steps
of the dynamic service time adjustment strategy. The inputs
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on January 30,2026 at 17:23:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1456 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025
Fig. 3. Buffer-aware path and adjusted service time.
Algorithm 3 Dynamic Service Time Adjustment
Require: Sets: Coordinates of RPs C, Visiting sequence S,
Buffer status list B, Initial service times T
Require: Starting point D, Radius Rc, UA V velocityV
1: Initialize service times list ST = T
2: for i = 1t o n do
3: Ccurrent = Si
4: if Bi == 1 then
5: Cnext = Ccurrent
6: Lextra = 2×Rc
V {Time for extra travel}
7: if Ti ≤Lextra then
8: STi =0 {Adjust service time}
9: else
10: STi = Ti −Lextra {Adjust service time}
11: end if
12: else
13: Cnext = ﬁnd_nearest_point(Ccurrent, Rc, D)
14: if path from D to Cnext forms a chord in the circle
with center at Ccurrent then
15: Lchord =g e t_distance(D, Cnext)
16: if Ti ≤ Lchord
V then
17: STi =0 {Adjust service time}
18: else
19: STi = Ti − Lchord
V {Adjust service time}
20: end if
21: end if
22: end if
23: D = Cnext
24: end for
25: return ST {Return adjusted service times}
to the algorithm include the coordinates of RPs, the visiting
sequence, the buffer status list, the depot as the starting
point, initial service times, the radius of circles, and the UA V
velocity.
Set C = C1, C2,..., Cn denote the coordinates of
RPs, S = S1, S2,..., Sn as the visiting sequence, B =
B1, B2,..., Bn as the buffer status list, where Bi =1 if the
buffer at Ci is full and Bi =0 otherwise, D as the depot,
T = T1, T2,..., Tn as the initial service times, Rc as the
radius of the circles, and V as the UA V velocity. The algorithm
initially sets the service times list as ST = T. For each Ci in
the visiting sequence, the algorithm considers two main cases:
1) If the buffer at Ci is full (Bi =1 ), the UA V has to
go to the center of the circle, ofﬂoad the data, and then
continue to its next destination. This deviation to the
center and forward again adds an extra distance of 2Rc,
resulting in an extra travel time of 2Rc
V . If the initial
service time Ti is less than or equal to this extra time,
the service time at Ci is adjusted to 0 (STi =0 ).
Otherwise, it is decreased by the extra time (STi =
Ti − 2Rc
V ).
2) If the buffer at Ci is not full (Bi =0 ), the UA V can
ﬂy directly to the edge of the next rendezvous point
without going to the center. If this ﬂight forms a chord
in the circle with the center at C
i , the length of the
chord Lchord is calculated. If the initial service time Ti
is less than or equal to the time required to travel along
the chord Lchord
V , the service time at Ci is adjusted to 0
(STi =0 ). Otherwise, it is decreased by the chord travel
time (STi = Ti − Lchord
V ). If a chord is not formed,
the UA V serves the service time at the entry point of
the circle. After visiting all RPs in the sequence, the
algorithm returns the adjusted service times ST.
We must determine the exit point to calculate the chord
length within the current circle by ﬁnding the point on the
circle’s boundary closest to the next destination. Pcurrent =
(xc, yc), Cnext =( xn, yn), and the exit point from the current
circle is Pexit =( xe, ye). Further, xe and ye is deﬁned as.
xe = xc + Rc × xn −xc
d , (14)
ye = yc + Rc × yn −yc
d , (15)
where d =
√
(xn −xc)2 +( yn −yc)2 and Rc is the circle’s
radius. The chord length Lchord is calculated as follows.
Lchord =
√
(xe −xc)2 +( ye −yc)2. (16)
If the UA V is currently at an RP with an empty buffer, and
the next RP is located in a way that a chord cannot be formed
within the current RP circle, then the UA V should head directly
to the next RP.
Lemma 1 (Constrained UAV Path): R = r
1, r2,..., rn
represent a set of RPs, and W = w1, w2,..., wn represent a
set of time windows corresponding to each point, where each
wi =[ si, ei] represents the start and end times of the window.
For any path P of the UA V , if the travel time to RPri (ttraveli)
plus the time spent at the previous RP (Tprev) exceeds the
end time of the time window (ei), then ri can be skipped for
that round, i.e., not included in path P.
Proof: Assume a path P for the UA V such that for each RP
ri ∈P, the UA V arrives at ri within its corresponding time
window wi . The arrival time at ri is given by:
tarrivali = Tprev + ttraveli (17)
We assume that for all ri ∈P, tarrivali ≤ ei . Now consider
an RP rj for which
Tprev + ttravelj > ej (18)
According to the assumption, rj is expected to be included in
the path P. However, if the UA V cannot reach rj within the
time window wj , it contradicts the requirements of path P.
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on January 30,2026 at 17:23:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
DONIPATI et al.: OPTIMIZING UA V-BASED DATA COLLECTION IN IoT NETWORKS WITH DST-BA 1457
Therefore, for such rj , it can be excluded from path P for that
round. This leads to the conclusion that under time window
constraints, the UA V path may involve skipping certain RPs
that cannot be feasibly visited within their time windows.
Lemma 2 (Optimal RP Selection): Given a set of RPs R =
r1, r2,..., rn , and a cost function C(ri, rj) that represents the
cost of traveling from point ri to point rj , the optimal choice
for the next RP rk from the current position ri is determined
using the following formula:
rk =a r g m i n
rj∈R,rj̸=ri
C
(
ri, rj
)
(19)
subject to time window constraints. This means that the UA V
aims to minimize the travel cost while ensuring compliance
with the speciﬁed time constraints.
Proof: We will prove this lemma through contradiction.
Let’s assume the existence of a RP r
m such that C(ri, rm) <
C(ri, rk), but the UA V does not select rm .I f rm satisﬁes the
time window constraints, choosing rm instead of rk would
result in a lower overall cost, which contradicts our assumption
that the UA V minimizes travel cost. Hence, if there is a
point r
m with a lower cost, it must not satisfy the time
window constraints. Therefore, the UA V always selects the
point with the lowest cost while adhering to the time window
constraints.
Theorem 1 (Feasible Path Under Time Window
Constraints): Given a set of RPs R = r1, r2,..., rn and a
cost function C(ri, rj), a feasible path exists for the UA V that
satisﬁes time window constraints if the following condition
holds:
n−1∑
i=1
C(ri, ri+1)+ C(rn, r1) ≤T (20)
where T represents the total allowable travel time for the UA V ,
the existence of such a path is guaranteed by the Optimal RP
Selection lemma, provided that the time window constraints
are met at each RP.
Proof: For a path to be feasible, the total time taken to travel
the path must be less than or equal to T. We can write this
condition as:
For each pair of points (r
i, ri+1), according to the lemma,
we choose ri+1 such that C(ri, ri+1) is minimized while
satisfying the time window constraints. Let us denote this min-
imum cost as Cmin(ri). Therefore, if the following condition
holds:
n−1∑
i=1
Cmin(ri)+ Cmin(rn) ≤T (21)
From Eqn. (21), it can be observed that there exists a feasible
path, which concludes our proof.
V. D ISCUSSION OF COMPLEXITY
In this section, we discuss the computational complexity
of the proposed strategy in terms of path planning and time
adjustment in UA V-enabled data collection.
1) Path Planning Complexity: The path planning phase
involves the selection of RPs and ﬁnding the optimal route for
the UA V to serve the nodes within speciﬁed time windows.
The selection of RPs is based on calculating neighborhoods
and choosing nodes with the highest number of neighbors as
RPs. This step has a complexity of O(|N|), where |N| is
the number of nodes in the network. The subsequent route
construction using the Path Cheapest Arc algorithm has a
complexity of O(|N|
2), taking into account the calculation
of distances between all pairs of nodes. The complexity of
the GLS algorithm for solution improvement depends on
the speciﬁc implementation, typically ranging from O(|N|
2)
to O(|N| 3). Therefore, the overall complexity of the path
planning phase can be expressed as O(|N| 3).
2) Time Adjustment Complexity: The dynamic service time
adjustment algorithm considers the buffer status and dis-
tance from the depot to determine the service times at RPs.
This algorithm involves iterating through all RPs, calculat-
ing distances, and adjusting service times accordingly. The
complexity of this algorithm is O(|RP|), where |RP| is the
number of RPs.
3) Overall Complexity: The proposed methodology com-
prises the path planning and time adjustment phases. The
complexity of the path planning phase dominates the overall
complexity. Therefore, the overall complexity of the proposed
algorithm can be approximated as O(|N|
3).
VI. P ERFORMANCE EVA L UAT I O N
This section presents the simulation results of our proposed
UA V-Based Data collection method with Dynamic Service
Time and Buffer-Aware trajectory planning (DST-BA). To
analyze the performance of the DST-BA, we have consid-
ered several performance matrices, such as network lifetime,
data collection rate, and path length. Further, to present
the effectiveness, we have compared DST-BA with current
research works such as BA-UA V [28],A C O - M S[5] and
NSGA-II [20]. This comparative review allowed us to position
the proposed research within the existing academic land-
scape and evaluate the relative strengths of the proposed
scheme.
A. Experimental Setup
The proposed work used extensive simulation exercises
powered by Python 3.9.13. The computational environment in
which these simulations were carried out included an operating
system of Windows 10 Enterprise 64-bit, a memory capacity of
8 GB RAM, and an Intel Core i5 processor. In the experiment,
N stationary IoT nodes were randomly distributed in a region
of 100 × 100 m
2. The base station was strategically ﬁxed
at the coordinates (50,50) m, serving as a constant reference
point. The principal methodology of this study entailed the
application of a meta-heuristic approach to determine an initial
UA V ﬂight path. Subsequently, this path was optimized by
implementing a Dynamic Service Time Adjustment algorithm,
further reﬁning our outcomes. Simulation parameters that are
used in our experiment are shown in Table III [20].
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on January 30,2026 at 17:23:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1458 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025
TABLE III
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Fig. 4. Analysis of network lifetime for different nodes.
B. Network Life Time
Since IoT devices have limited energy and transmission
range, UA Vs are used to collect data by hovering at IoT nodes.
This helps to conserve transmission energy across all IoT
nodes. In the event of a buffer overﬂow, all neighboring nodes
associated with the RP will be required to re-transmit their
data to their respective RP. This process signiﬁcantly increases
energy consumption, thus reducing the lifetime of the network.
Fig. 4 graphically represents how network lifetime is impacted
by an increase in the number of nodes. As the number of nodes
grows, there is a subsequent increase in neighboring nodes for
several RPs, which consequently leads to a higher incidence
of buffer overﬂows, adversely affecting the network lifetime.
The DST-BA integrates time windows and buffer awareness
for data gathering, a strategy that signiﬁcantly mitigates the
prevalence of buffer overﬂows. Compared to methodologies
presented in [28] and [5], the DST-BA demonstrates lower
buffer overﬂow rates, which contributes to better energy
preservation, resulting an extension of the network lifetime.
C. Data Collection Rate
The proposed methodology handles buffer overﬂows efﬁ-
ciently by integrating time windows and buffer awareness,
resulting in a better data collection rate. When the buffer size
is increased, it prevents data loss due to buffer overﬂow, which
helps in improving the data collection rate. If data generation
rates at the nodes exceed the UA V’s collection rate, increasing
the buffer size can prevent data loss due to buffer overﬂow.
When the buffer is full, incoming data can be lost until there
is enough room again in the buffer. Fig. 5(a) represents the
data collection rate for different buffer sizes when the number
of nodes is 200. The DST-BA gave better results for the Data
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Fig. 5. Performance analysis of data collection rate when (a) Number of
nodes is 200. (b) Number of nodes is 400. (c) Number of nodes is 600, and
(d) Path length by varying number of UA Vs.
collection rate. Moreover, the potential data loss is reduced as
the buffer size increases. If UA V is interrupted or unable to
provide service at a particular RP, large buffers continue to
store the data avoiding buffer overﬂows resulting in a better
data collection rate. Fig. 5(b) and Fig. 5(c) represent the data
collection rate for different buffer sizes when the number of
nodes is 400 and 600, respectively. With larger buffers, nodes
can store more data between UA V visits. As a result, during
each visit, the UA V can collect more data, increasing the
effective data collection rate.
D. Effect of Path Length
Fig. 5(d) represents the trajectory length for varying UA Vs
used 1, 2, 3, and 4 respectively for different buffer capacity.
It should be noted that the overall travel length grows when
more UA Vs are employed. It is now owing to an increase of
overlapping ﬂying regions closer to the depot. As a result,
adding unneeded UA Vs for data gathering will not only add
to the cost of deployment but will also increase the overall
energy consumption of the UA V system. When the buffer size
is increased, there is a high chance of optimizing the path
length. With more data stored at each node, there is more
ﬂexibility in scheduling the UA V’s path. This means that the
UA V can be scheduled to visit nodes in a way that minimizes
the total path length, rather than needing to visit certain nodes
urgently to prevent buffer overﬂow.
E. Data Generation & Buffer-Aware Path
In Fig. 6(a), Fig. 6(e), and Fig. 6(i), the red color represents
a higher data generation rate. These three are taken from a
random UA V round number to visualize how the data gener-
ation rate changes. Fig. 6(b), Fig. 6(f) and Fig. 6(j) represent
RP generation, Fig. 6(c), Fig. 6(g) and Fig. 6(k) represent the
corresponding path formed while considering time-windows,
Fig. 6(d), Fig. 6(h) and Fig. 6(l) represents how the obtained
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on January 30,2026 at 17:23:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
DONIPATI et al.: OPTIMIZING UA V-BASED DATA COLLECTION IN IoT NETWORKS WITH DST-BA 1459
Fig. 6. Performance analysis (a) Heat-map for data generation rate. (b) RP generation. (c) Path formation. (d) Adjusted buffer-aware path. (e) Heat- map for
data generation rate. (f) RP generation. (g) Path formation. (h) Adjusted buffer-aware path. (i) Heat-map for data generation rate. (j) RP generatio n. (k) Path
formation. (l) Adjusted buffer-aware path.
path is further Adjusted Using the proposed Algorithm. These
visual representations provide valuable insights into the vari-
ations in data generation, RP generation, path formation, and
the adjusted paths based on buffer considerations. In fact, to
conserve UA V’s energy, we optimize its route by minimizing
time spent at RPs and avoiding RPs that reduce the overall
trajectory length. Both the reduced number of RPs and the
optimized ﬂight trajectory lead to signiﬁcant preservation of
UA V energy.
VII. C
ONCLUSION
The proposed approach tackles the central challenge of
optimizing the UA V’s path and service time at carefully
selected RPs, leveraging buffer status and speciﬁc time win-
dows as critical factors. By implementing the PCA-GLS
method and employing the proposed innovative algorithm
for dynamic service time adjustment based on buffer status,
remarkable enhancements in the system’s overall efﬁciency
have been witnessed. Efﬁcient planning the UA V’s route and
ensuring timely servicing of each RP within its designated
time window have maximized data collection efﬁciency within
the IoT network. The simulation results validates that our
proposed strategy successfully optimized the UA V’s trajectory,
considerably reduced service time, and improved the efﬁciency
of data collection. The proposed solution is suitable for several
applications like, monitoring activities (forest, smart grids,
border surveillance), disaster management etc.
However, in this work, the limited and short-lived energy
sources of UA Vs signiﬁcantly constrain their operational dura-
tion. As a result, UA Vs must frequently return to the base
station (BS) to recharge their batteries, leading to substantial
penalties in terms of mission delays and disruptions. Future
work can address this issue by integrating wireless energy
harvesting to recharge the onboard batteries through charging
stations or vehicles.
R
EFERENCES
[1] Y . Yang, W. Wang, L. Liu, K. Dev, and N. M. F. Qureshi, “AoI
optimization in the UA V-aided trafﬁc monitoring network under attack:
A Stackelberg game viewpoint,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. ,
vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 932–941, Jan. 2023.
[2] T. Bouzid, N. Chaib, M. L. Bensaad, and O. S. Oubbati, “5G network
slicing with unmanned aerial vehicles: Taxonomy, survey, and future
directions,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. Technol., vol. 34, no. 3, 2023,
Art. no. e4721.
[3] Z. Wei et al., “UA V-assisted data collection for Internet of Things:
As u r v e y , ”IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 9, no. 17, pp. 15460–15483,
Sep. 2022.
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on January 30,2026 at 17:23:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1460 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025
[4] A. Hazra, “Promising role of visual IoT: Challenges and future research
directions,” IEEE Eng. Manag. Rev. , vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 169–178,
Dec. 2023.
[5] P. K. Donta, T. Amgoth, and C. S. R. Annavarapu, “An extended ACO-
based mobile sink path determination in wireless sensor networks,” J.
Ambient Intell. Humaniz. Comput., vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 8991–9006, 2021.
[6] K. Liu and J. Zheng, “UA V trajectory optimization for time-
constrained data collection in UA V-enabled environmental monitoring
systems,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 9, no. 23, pp. 24300–24314,
Dec. 2022.
[7] K. Messaoudi, O. S. Oubbati, A. Rachedi, A. Lakas, T. Bendouma, and
N. Chaib, “A survey of UA V-based data collection: Challenges, solutions
and future perspectives,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl. , vol. 216, Jul. 2023,
Art. no. 103670.
[8] A. Mukherjee, S. Misra, V . S. P. Chandra, and M. S. Obaidat, “Resource-
optimized multiarmed bandit-based ofﬂoad path selection in edge UA V
swarms,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4889–4896,
Jun. 2019.
[9] M. Samir, C. Assi, S. Sharafeddine, and A. Ghrayeb, “Online altitude
control and scheduling policy for minimizing AoI in UA V-assisted
IoT wireless networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. , vol. 21, no. 7,
pp. 2493–2505, Jul. 2022.
[10] B. Alzahrani, O. S. Oubbati, A. Barnawi, M. Atiquzzaman, and
D. Alghazzawi, “UA V assistance paradigm: State-of-the-art in applica-
tions and challenges,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl. , vol. 166, Sep. 2020,
Art. no. 102706.
[11] Q. Wu, Q. Liu, W. Zhu, and Z. Wu, “Energy efﬁcient UA V-
Aassisted IoT data collection: A graph-based deep reinforcement
learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag. , early access,
Aug. 28, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3450964.
[12] C. Grasso, R. Raftopoulos, and G. Schembra, “Smart zero-touch
management of UA V-based edge network,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service
Manag., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 4350–4368, Dec. 2022.
[13] Y . Wang, M. Chen, C. Pan, K. Wang, and Y . Pan, “Joint optimization
of UA V trajectory and sensor uploading powers for UA V-assisted data
collection in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Internet Things J. ,v o l .9 ,
no. 13, pp. 11214–11226, Jul. 2022.
[14] J.-H. Lee, K.-H. Park, Y .-C. Ko, and M.-S. Alouini, “Throughput
maximization of mixed FSO/RF UA V-aided mobile relaying with a
buffer,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 683–694,
Jan. 2021.
[15] A. Jaiswal, S. Shivateja, A. Hazra, N. Mazumdar, J. Singh, and
V . G. Menon, “UA V-enabled mobile RAN and RF-energy transfer proto-
col for enabling sustainable IoT in energy-constrained networks,” IEEE
Trans. Green Commun. Netw., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1118–1127, Sep. 2024.
[16] P. Maurya, V . M. R. Tummala, A. Hazra, and S. P. Mohanty,
“Advancing industry 5.0 with UA V-driven transformations: Future
prospectives,” IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag. , vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 30–35,
Sep. 2024.
[17] C. Zhan, Y . Zeng, and R. Zhang, “Energy-efﬁcient data collection in
UA V enabled wireless sensor network,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett. ,
vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 328–331, Jun. 2018.
[18] J. Xiong, L. Guo, M. Shan, B. Liu, P. Yu, and L. Guo, “Wireless
resources cooperation of assembled small UA Vs for data collections of
IoT,”IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 9411–9422, Jun. 2023.
[19] K. Messaoudi, O. S. Oubbati, A. Rachedi, and T. Bendouma, “UA V-
UGV-based system for AoI minimization in IoT networks,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. , 2023, pp. 4743–4748.
[20] N. Mazumdar, S. Roy, A. Nag, and J. P. Singh, “A buffer-aware dynamic
UA V trajectory design for data collection in resource-constrained IoT
frameworks,” Comput. Elect. Eng., vol. 100, May 2022, Art. no. 107934.
[21] X. Li, J. Liu, X. Chen, J. Wang, and M. Pan, “Caching on the sky:
A multi-agent federated reinforcement learning approach for UA V-
assisted edge caching,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 11, no. 17,
pp. 28213–28226, Sep. 2024.
[22] X. Qi, J. Chong, Q. Zhang, and Z. Yang, “Towards cooperatively caching
in multi-UA V assisted network: A queue-aware CDS-based reinforce-
ment learning mechanism with energy efﬁciency maximization,” IEEE
Internet Things J. , vol. 11, no. 9, pp. 16461–16477, May 2024.
[23] M. Biabani, N. Yazdani, and H. Fotouhi, “RBDMS: Rate-adaptation
and buffer-awareness data gathering for mobile sink scheduling in
WSNs,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 22, no. 21, pp. 21326–21341, Nov. 2022.
[24] O. Ghdiri, W. Jaafar, S. Alfattani, J. B. Abderrazak, and
H. Yanikomeroglu, “Ofﬂine and online UA V-enabled data collection in
time-constrained IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Green Commun. Netw. ,
vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 1918–1933, Dec. 2021.
[25] C. Hao, Y . Chen, Z. Mai, G. Chen, and M. Yang, “Joint optimization on
trajectory, transmission and time for effective data acquisition in UA V-
enabled IoT,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 71, no. 7, pp. 7371–7384,
Jul. 2022.
[26] C. H. Liu, Z. Chen, J. Tang, J. Xu, and C. Piao, “Energy-efﬁcient
UA V control for effective and fair communication coverage: A deep
reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 36,
no. 9, pp. 2059–2070, Sep. 2018.
[27] B. Hua et al., “Channel modeling for UA V-to-ground communications
with posture variation and fuselage scattering effect,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 71, no. 5, pp. 3103–3116, May 2023.
[28] M. K. Singh, A. Choudhary, S. Gulia, and A. Verma, “Multi-objective
NSGA-II optimization framework for UA V path planning in an UA V-
assisted WSN,” J. Supercomput., vol. 79, no. 1, pp. 832–866, 2023.
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on January 30,2026 at 17:23:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
